feat: add user account disabled with inactivity (#2566)
defenseunicorns/uds-core: docs/how-to-guides/identity-and-authorization/configure-account-inactivity-disable.mdx

---
title: Configure automatic account inactivity disable

> description: Configure Keycloak to automatically disable non-admin user accounts after a set number of days of inactivity, satisfying APSC-DV-000320 (ASD STIG).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Configure Keycloak to automatically disable non-admin user accounts after a set number of days of inactivity.
```

sidebar:
  order: 3.020
---

import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

## What you'll accomplish

> You'll configure UDS Core's Keycloak to automatically disable non-admin user accounts that have not authenticated for a configurable number of days. This satisfies **APSC-DV-000320** (ASD STIG), which requires applications to automatically disable accounts after 35 days of inactivity. Accounts belonging to realm administrators are excluded and are never automatically disabled.

Reviewer 2: nit: think there is another reference to the STIG here that can be removed?

> You'll configure UDS Core's Keycloak to automatically disable non-admin user accounts that have not authenticated for a configurable number of days. This satisfies **APSC-DV-000320** (ASD STIG), which requires applications to automatically disable accounts after 35 days of inactivity. Accounts belonging to realm administrators are excluded and are never automatically disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll configure UDS Core's Keycloak to automatically disable non-admin user accounts that have not authenticated for a configurable number of days. Accounts belonging to realm administrators are excluded and are never automatically disabled.
```

## Before you begin

UDS Core uses the Keycloak [Workflows](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/index.html#managing-workflows) preview feature to track `user-authenticated` events per user and trigger a `disable-user` action after the configured inactivity window. The workflow is seeded into the uds realm on initial deployment and is disabled by default (`accountInactivityDays: 0`).

**What counts as activity:** The workflow tracks `user-authenticated` events. Any successful login through UDS Core SSO, including logins via federated identity providers (Azure AD, Google SAML), resets the inactivity timer.

**Newly provisioned accounts:** Accounts that have never logged in do not generate a `user-authenticated` event and therefore never start a workflow instance. Accounts provisioned before this feature was enabled are also not retroactively evaluated. Run a one-time audit of last-login timestamps after enabling via **Keycloak Admin Console** → **Users**.

**Admin accounts excluded:** Users with the `realm-management/realm-admin` role are never disabled by this workflow.

> [!NOTE]

> > Keycloak Workflows is a [preview feature](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/index.html#preview-features). UDS Core enables it by default via `--features=preview,fips`. Preview features may change in future Keycloak releases.

Reviewer: nit: I don't know if this callout is really necessary in the docs but don't feel strongly.

## Steps

<Steps>

1. **Set `accountInactivityDays` in your bundle override**

>    Add the override to your `uds-bundle.yaml`. Set the value to the number of days of inactivity after which a non-admin account is disabled. The STIG-required value is `35`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Add the override to your `uds-bundle.yaml`. Set the value to the number of days of inactivity after which you want non-admin accounts to be disabled.
```

reworded slightly + removed STIG mention

   ```yaml title="uds-bundle.yaml"
   packages:
     - name: core
       repository: registry.defenseunicorns.com/public/core
       ref: x.x.x-upstream
       overrides:
         keycloak:
           keycloak:
             values:
               - path: realmConfig.accountInactivityDays
                 value: 35
   ```

   Setting the value to `0` (the default) leaves the workflow disabled.

   > [!IMPORTANT]

>    > This setting is applied during initial realm import only. Changing `accountInactivityDays` in a bundle re-deploy updates the Kubernetes Secret but does **not** update the live workflow. Keycloak only reads the value during the first realm import. To update a running instance, use the Keycloak Admin Console to toggle **Enabled** on the `disable-inactive-users` workflow and set the **after** duration on the `disable-user` step to match your desired value.

Reviewer: Is it worth adding some more "steps" here in terms of where to navigate to (even screenshots maybe)? I could see this as being "optional" steps for changing after deploy.

   > [!WARNING]

>    > Setting the **after** duration to `0` will disable non-admin accounts immediately on their next login. Always confirm the duration is correct before enabling the workflow.

Reviewer: This might be confusing to a reader as a few lines up they would've read this:
> Setting the value to `0` (the default) leaves the workflow disabled.

I think this is only applicable if setting in the Keycloak UI right?

Author: i moved this into a separate optional step that's more specifically tied to manual admin realm actions.

2. **Create and deploy your bundle**

   ```bash
   uds create <path-to-bundle-dir>
   uds deploy uds-bundle-<name>-<arch>-<version>.tar.zst
   ```

</Steps>

## Verification

After deployment, confirm the workflow is active:

1. Log in to the Keycloak Admin Console at `keycloak.<admin_domain>`
2. Switch to the **uds** realm
3. In the left sidebar under **Configure**, click **Workflows**
4. Confirm the `disable-inactive-users` workflow is listed and **Enabled** is toggled on
5. Log in as a non-admin test user through UDS Core SSO

> 6. Return to the Admin Console, open the workflow, and click **View active instances**. A new instance should appear for the test user with a `disable-user` step scheduled at the number of days you configured (e.g., 35 days if you used the STIG-required value)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Return to the Admin Console, open the workflow, and click **View active instances**. A new instance should appear for the test user with a `disable-user` step scheduled at the number of days you configured
```

---
title: Configure automatic account inactivity disable
description: Configure Keycloak to automatically disable non-admin user accounts after a set number of days of inactivity, satisfying APSC-DV-000320 (ASD STIG).
sidebar:
  order: 3.020
---

import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

## What you'll accomplish

You'll configure UDS Core's Keycloak to automatically disable non-admin user accounts that have not authenticated for a configurable number of days. This satisfies **APSC-DV-000320** (ASD STIG), which requires applications to automatically disable accounts after 35 days of inactivity. Accounts belonging to realm administrators are excluded and are never automatically disabled.

## Prerequisites

> - UDS Core deployed (Keycloak 26.5+)

Reviewer 3: Since Keycloak versions are tied with the UDS Core, maybe it's better to use UDS Core version here?
